 Interview  Guide 
 The  role  of  the  LS/CMI™  interviewer  is  described  in  the  LS/CMI  User's  Manual.  Interviewers  may 
 choose  to  develop  their  own  semi-structured  interview  to  elicit  the  information  needed  to  make 
 LS/CMI  ratings,  or  they  may  use  this  interview  guide.  If  this  interview  guide  is  used,  interviewers 
 should  ask  each  of  the  numbered  questions;  however,  the  wording  of  questions  may  be  varied  as 
 necessary  to  maintain  rapport. 
 [square  brackets]  Questions  in  square  brackets  are  probes;  they  are  asked  only  to  prompt  the 
 interviewee  for  more  detailed  information  or  to  clarify  a  point  for  the  interviewee  to  provide  more 
 information.  Some  items  (i.e.,  items  18,  40,  and  43a)  provide  more  detailed  questions  and 
 considerations.  It  is  not  necessary  to  ask  each  subquestion;  they  are  provided  only  as  suggested 
 queries. 
 In  general,  focus  upon  the  present  and/or  past  year.  The  LS/CMI  assesses  the  situation  and  the 
 factors  that  require  attention  in  order  to  minimize  the  risks  for  re-offending. 
 What  is  your  full  name  and  date  of  birth? 
 What  is  your  license  status? 
 What  forms  of  ID  do  you  have  access  to?  (State  ID,  Birth  certiﬁcate,  Social  Security  card,  prison  ID) 
 How  many  prior  dispositions  (or  convictions)  did  you  have  as  a  youth  (juvenile)? 
 How  many  prior  adult  convictions  do  you  have? 
 How  many  present  (or  current)  offenses  do  you  have  (or  how  many  offenses  were  dealt  with  at  the 
 same  time  on  the  last  conviction? 
 Can  you  list  the  offenses: 
 At  what  age  were  you  ﬁrst  arrested  or  charged? 
 Were  you  ever  incarcerated  as  a  result  of  a  conviction? 
 Were  you  ever  punished  for  institutional  misconduct? 
 How  many? 
 Have  you  had  any  behavior  reports  while  in  prison? 
 How  many  and  for  what  infraction(s)? 
 Have  you  ever  had  your  probation  or  parole  suspended  (or  revoked)  while  you  were  under  any  kind  of 
 (prior)  community  supervision? 
 Have  you  ever  had  new  charges  laid  while  you  were  under  any  kind  of  (prior)  community 
 supervision? 
 If  yes,  describe  the  event(s). 
 Instructions  for  employment  questions 
 This  subcomponent  is  relatively  straightforward.  However,  extra  care  is  needed  when  completing 
 the  LS/CMifor  inmates  who  are,  strictly  speaking,  unemployed.  When  doing  an  LS/CMI 
 administration  with  an  incarcerated  offender,  it  is  helpful  to  view  his  or  her  incarceration  as  a  type 
 of  "leave  without  pay."  If  he  or  she  is  serving  a  relatively  brief  sentence  (under  2  years),  consider 
 ﬁrst,  was  he  or  she  working  before  incarceration,  and  if  so,  will  he  or  she  be  able  to  return  to  this 
 job?  If  the  answer  is  yes,  then  assess  on  items  15,  16,  and  17.  If  the  answer  is  no,  then  the 
 interviewee  is  assessed  as  unemployed.  If  an  offender,  whether  incarcerated  or  not,  is  being  paid  to 
 participate  in  a  training  program  and  there  is  a  work  component,  then  he  or  she  is  assessed  as 
 employed. 
 If  the  interviewee  is  currently  in  the  labor  market  (i.e.,  in  the  community  or  working  in  a  long-term 
 prison  setting),  ask  the  following  questions. 
 What  is  your  current  employment  (job)  status? 
 Employed  full-time. 
 Employed  part-time.  Hours  per  week: 
 Unemployed. 
 In  the  last  year  (or  in  the  last  year  before  you  were  incarcerated)  how  many  months  have  you  been 
 employed  (worked)?  [Where  and  for  how  long  in  each  place?  Have  you  been  employed  less  than  50% 
 of  the  last  12  months,  or  the  12  months  prior  to  incarceration?  Are  you  working  at  least  50%  of  the 
 time  that  is  available  to  you  for  work?] 
 What  is  the  longest  period  of  time  that  you  have  been  employed  for? 
 Have  you  ever  been  unemployed  in  the  community  during  a  12-month  period? 
 What  is  the  last  grade  that  you  have  successfully  completed  in  academic  or  technical  high  school? 
 Have  you  completed  a  high  school  diploma  or  GED? 
 Have  you  ever  been  suspended  or  expelled? 
 NOTE  :  this  will  probably  not  be  any  of  our  clients.  If  the  interviewee  is  in  school  or  was  in  school 
 just  before  incarceration  and  plans  to  return  to  school  upon  release,  then  ask  the  following  three 
 questions. 
 How  do/did  you  do  in  school?  [Do/did  you  do  your  homework?  How  are/were  your  grades?  Do/did 
 you  like  school?] 
 Do/did  you  get  along  well  with  your  fellow  students?  [Do/did  you  eat  lunch  with  them?  Do/did  you 
 spend  time  outside  of  school  with  them?] 
 How  do/did  you  feel  about  your  teachers?  [Do/did  you  ever  talk  to  your  teachers  outside  of  class? 
 Do/did  you  ever  seek  their  opinions  on  personal  matters?  Do/did  you  value  their  opinions?  How  well 
 do/did  you  get  along  with  your  teachers?] 
 If  the  interviewee  is  employed  or  was  employed  just  before  incarceration  and  plans  toreturn  to  the 
 same  employment  upon  release  or  is  working  in  a  prison  industry/work  context,  then  ask  the 
 following  three  questions. 
 How  do/did  you  do  in  your  job?  [Do/did  you  like  your  work?  Does/did  your  boss  compliment  you  on 
 your  work?  Have  you  had  any  promotions  for  your  work?"] 
 Do/did  you  get  along  well  with  your  coworkers?  [Do/did  you  eat  lunch  with  them?  Do/did  you  spend 
 time  outside  of  work  with  them?  For  inmates  in  a  prison  work  setting,  pay  special  attention  to  the 
 potential  antisocial  inﬂuences  that  may  arise.] 
 Do/did  you  like  working  for  your  boss?  [How  do/did  you  feel  about  your  boss? 
 Do/did  you  respect  and  like  your  boss?  Do/did  you  ever  seek  your  boss's  opinions  on  personal 
 matters?  Do/did  you  willingly  follow  your  boss's  orders?] 
 How  satisﬁed  are  you  with  your  marital  (or  equivalent)  situation?  Describe: 
 (Note:  Consider  the  following  points  in  assessing  the  reward  rating  for  the  interviewee's  situation) 
 Do  you  have  frequent  arguments?  Are  you  sexually  dissatisﬁed? 
 Have  you  ever  experienced  inﬁdelity?  Was  there  an  unwanted  pregnancy? 
 Have  you  ever  argued  about  child  rearing?  Has  there  ever  been  any  conﬂict  concerning 
 in-laws/parents? 
 Do  you  ever  argue  about  money?  Do  you  argue  about  your  choice  of  companions  or  friends? 
 Do  you  ever  argue  about  leisure  time?  Do  you  ever  have  arguments  concerning  ex-partners? 
 Do  you  experience  stress  over  the  individual  problems  of  your 
 partner? 
 Do  you  have  difficulty  with  openness,  warmth,  or  intimacy? 
 Do  you  have  communication  problems?  Are  you  or  your  partner  excessively  dependenton  the  other? 
 Have  you  been  contemplating  separation  or  divorce?  Are  you  going  through  separation  or  divorce? 
 Are  you  able  to  accept  your  separation  or  divorce?  Have  there  been  problems  with  child  access  and  custody 
 issues? 
 Are  you  experiencing  any  harassment  from  your  ex-partner?  Does  your  partner  physically,  psychologically,  and/or  sexually 
 abuse  you? 
 If  single,  consider  asking  some  of  the  following  questions. 
 Are  you  satisﬁed  not  having  a  partner?  Do  you  enjoy  the  single  life? 
 Do  you  wish  that  you  had  someone  to  come  home  to  each  day?  Are  you  actively  looking  for  a  commitment  from  someone? 
 Please  describe  your  relationship  with  your  parents  (the  people  who  actually  raised  you).  [Do  you 
 visit  them?  Are  they  helpful  with  problems  you  may  have?  Do  you  argue  with  them?  For  inmates:Do 
 your  parents  visit  you?  During  visits  do  you  argue  with  your  parents)?  Do  your  parents  write  to  you? 
 Refer  to  the  LS/CMI  User's  Manual  if  one  or  both  parents  are  deceased.] 
 Please  describe  your  relationship  with  other  relatives.  [Grandparents?  Siblings?  Cousins?  In-laws? 
 Aunts?  Uncles?] 
 Does  anyone  in  your  family,  including  spouse  and  close  relatives,  have  a  criminal  record?  Who? 
 What  kind  of  organizations  or  clubs  have  you  belonged  to  over  the  past  year  (or  in  the  year  prior  to 
 your  incarceration)?  [Do  you  attend  their  meetings?  Help  out  with  activities?  For  inmates  serving  a 
 sentence  of  more  than  2  years:  Are  you  involved  with  any  community  volunteer-led  groups  in  prison 
 on  a  regular  basis?  Do  you  regularly  attend  church  meeting  groups  here?] 
 How  do  you  usually  spend  your  free  time?  [What  kind  of  hobbies  do  you  have? 
 What  kind  of  satisfaction  do  you  derive  from  them? 
 Do  you  know  many  people  who  are  involved  in  crime?  [Do  you  know  very  many  people  who  have 
 been  in  trouble  with  the  law?] 
 Are  any  of  your  friends  involved  in  crime?  [Have  many  of  your  friends  been  in  trouble  with  the  law? 
 How  seriously  or  often  have  they  been  involved  with  the  law?] 
 Can  you  give  me  some  examples? 
 Do  you  know  many  people  who  are  not  involved  in  crime? 
 Do  you  have  many  friends  who  are  not  at  all  involved  in  criminal  activities? 
 Can  you  give  me  some  examples? 
 1.6  Alcohol/Drug  Problem 
 NOTE  :  Substances  Eexcludes  nicotine  and  caffeine.  Collateral  review  is  also  required  here  to  see  if 
 there  is  a  history. 
 Have  you  ever  had  an  alcohol  problem?  [How  much  did  you  drink?  How  often  did  you  drink?Have 
 friends  or  relatives  ever  told  you  that  you  have  an  alcohol  problem?] 
 Have  you  ever  had  a  drug  problem?  [Have  friends  or  relatives  ever  told  you  that  you  have  a  drug 
 problem?  What  kind  of  drugs  have  you  taken?] 
 Specify  drugs  taken: 
 Do  you  currently  have  an  alcohol  problem?  [How  much  do  you  drink  in  an  average  week?Have  your 
 drinking  habits  changed  at  all  over  the  past  year?] 
 Do  you  currently  have  a  drug  problem?  [What  kind  of  drugs  are  you  taking?  Have  your  drug-taking 
 habits  changed  over  the  past  year?  Were  you  taking  drugs  while  you  were  in  prison?] 
 Specify  drugs  currently  taken: 
 Do  you  think  that  your  use  of  drugs/alcohol  has  or  could  contribute  to  any  law  violations? 
 [Trafficking  in  drugs  to  support  a  habit?  B  &  Es  and  thefts  of  property  offense  for  money  for  drugs? 
 Parole  violations?  Have  you  obtained  prescription  drugs  under  false  pretenses  or  for  nonmedical 
 purposes?] 
 Has  your  family  complained  to  you  about  your  drinking  or  drug  use?  [Have  you  been  kicked  outof 
 the  house  because  of  your  drinking  or  substance  use?] 
 Have  you  had  problems  in  school  or  work  because  of  your  use  of  drugs  or  alcohol?  [Have  you  ever 
 not  gone  to  school  or  work  because  you  had  a  hangover?  Were  you  asked  to  leave  school  or  work 
 because  of  alcohol/  drug  use?  Did  you  lose  your  job  because  of  intoxication  or  being  "high?"  Do/did 
 you  have  difficulties  carrying  out  your  duties  at  work  or  concentrating  in  school  because  of  being 
 under  the  inﬂuence  of  alcohol/drugs?] 
 Have  you  had  any  medical  problems  due  to  drug  or  alcohol  use?  [Has  a  doctor  told  you  to  cut  down 
 on  your  substance  use?  Do  you  drink  until  you  are  unconscious?  Have  you  experienced  any  ﬁnancial 
 difficulties  because  of  alcohol  or  drug  use?  Do  you  ever  drink  or  take  drugs  to  avoid  a  hangover?  Do 
 you  drink  when  you  ﬁrst  get  up  in  the  morning?  Have  you  ever  experienced  drug  withdrawal  or 
 "DTs*?  Have  you  been  to  a  Detox  Center?  Have  you  ever  experienced  blackouts?] 
 This  need  area  is  concerned  with  what  and  how  a  person  thinks  about  him/herself,  others,  and  the 
 world.  Are  his/her  attitudes,  values  and  beliefs,  and  thinking  procriminal/antisocial  or 
 anticriminal/prosocial? 
 How  do  you  feel  about  the  crimes  you've  committed?  [Do  you  have  any  regrets  about  your  crimes? 
 Do  you  think  the  crimes  were  wrong?  What  are  your  thoughts  about  the  victims  of  your  crimes?] 
 (Note  expressions  that  provide  excuses  for  criminal  conductor  favorable  evaluations  of  crime  and  a 
 criminal  lifestyle.) 
 Would  you  like  to  lead  a  life  without  crime?  [What  do  you  think  about  living  a  straight  life?  Do  you 
 believe  in  obeying  the  law?  Is  the  law  fair?  How  important  is  education  in  life?  How  important  is 
 having  a  job?] 
 Do  you  think  your  sentence  was  appropriate  and  fair?  [Was  your  sentence  too  harsh  or  too  lenient? 
 Do  you  think  that  you  had  a  choice  in  committing  the  offense?  How  do  you  think  you  were  treated  by 
 the  courts?] 
 Do  you  feel  that  the  supervision  you  are  being  placed  under  is  appropriate  and  fair?  Do  you  intend  to 
 cooperate  and  seek  assistance  for  signiﬁcant  problems?  Are  you  planning  to  seek  or  continue 
 treatment?  Is  your  probation  officer  or  worker  fair  and  reasonable?] 
 Have  you  ever  been  assessed  by  a  psychiatrist  or  psychologist?  [If  yes,  do  you  know  the  diagnosis? 
 If  the  interviewee  does  not  know  the  diagnosis,  search  ﬁles  for  reports  that  detail  the  diagnosis.] 
 Were  you  ever  removed  from  your  home  by  a  Child  Welfare  Agency  when  you  were  young? 
 Did  a  child  psychiatrist  ever  see  you? 
 Were  you  truant  from  school? 
 Did  you  ever  run  away  from  home? 
 Did  your  parents  have  a  lot  of  trouble  raising  you? 
 Do  you  have  any  convictions  for  violent  offenses? 
 Have  you  had  any  history  of  escape  or  attempted  escape  from  a  youth  or  adult  institutional  facility 
 (this  includes  prisons,  halfway  houses,  etc.)? 
 What  are  the  sources  of  Income  for  your  household  and  what  would  you  estimate  is  the  annual 
 income? 
 Does  the  household  sometimes  receive  government  assistance  or  other  forms  of  assistance? 
 Are  you  worried  about  having  sufficient  money  to  pay  debts? 
 Has  your  spouse/partner  or  have  your  parents  complained  about  you  spending  too  much  on 
 nonessentials? 
 Do  you  have  a  bank  account  (savings  or  checking)? 
 Do  you  know  your  credit  score  and,  if  so,  what  is  it? 
 Have  you  had  any  phone  calls,  letters,  or  personal  visits  from  creditors  requesting  payment  of  past 
 due  accounts? 
 Do  you  have  any  existing  debts?  If  yes,  how  much  and  to  whom? 
 Do  you  have  a  personal  budget? 
 Do  you  follow  your  budget,  or  do  you  have  problems  following  your  budget? 
 Are  you  worried  about  sufficient  income  to  meet  your  basic  needs  (e.g,  housing,  food?) 
 Aside  from  institutions,  how  many  residential  addresses  have  you  lived  at  in  the  last  year? 
 Is  your  probation/parole  officer  or  worker  fair  and  reasonable?  [Were  charges  ever  laid  or  your 
 probation  or  parole  suspended  during  prior  community  supervision?  Have  you  had  (m)any  run-ins  or 
 conﬂicts  with  your  probation  or  parole  officer?  Do  you  think  that  the  conditions  of  your  supervision 
 are  appropriate?] 
 Are  you  afraid  of  anyone  harming  you?  [Do  you  owe  money  for  unpaid  drug  debts?  Have  you  worked 
 for  anyone  in  the  drug  trade  (dealer)  or  prostitution  (pimp)?  Is  there  anyone  who  may  want  to  seek 
 revenge  on  you  for  something  that  you  may  have  done?  Have  you  ever  informed  on  someone?  Do 
 you  need  protection?] 
 Do  you  often  act  before  thinking? 
 Do  you  set  goals  for  yourself? 
 Do  you  make  plans? 
 Do  you  check  to  see  if  you  are  following  your  plans? 
 Do  you  get  into  trouble  almost  by  accident? 
 Do  you  have  frequent  arguments  with  friends? 
 Do  you  ﬁnd  yourself  arguing  with  strangers? 
 Do  you  ﬁnd  that  you  need  to  blow  off  steam  now  and  then? 
 Do  you  get  into  physical  ﬁghts  with  people? 
 Do  you  often  become  impatient  with  others? 
 Have  you  ever  physically  hurt  your  partner? 
 Do  you  like  to  be  in  control? 
 Have  you  ever  threatened  someone? 
 Do  you  have  frequent  arguments  with  your  partner? 
 Do  you  think  that  your  partner  is  spending  too  much  time  with  others? 
 How  do  you  get  your  partner  to  do  what  you  want? 
 If  working: 
 Has  your  boss  spoken  to  you  about  bothering  other  employees? 
 Do  you  make  fun  of  other  employees? 
 Do  you  push  other  employees  too  hard? 
 Have  you  ever  sexually  assaulted  anyone?  If  yes,  probe  for  age  of  victim(s)  and  details. 
 Have  you  ever  drugged  someone  to  have  sex? 
 Do  you  frequent  prostitutes? 
 Do  you  have  difficulty  making  friends?  [Are  you  a  loner?  Do  people  sometimes  laugh  at  you?  Do 
 people  take  advantage  of  you?  Are  you  shy  in  social  groups?  Do  you  spend  mostof  your  spare  time 
 by  yourself?] 
 Are  most  of  your  friends  older/younger  than  you?  [How  much  older/younger?  A  5-year  age 
 difference  or  more  is  probably  signiﬁcant.] 
 Do  you  think  that  some  racial  or  ethnic  groups  don't  deserve  the  beneﬁts  or  advantages  they  are 
 given  simply  because  they  represent  a  minority  group? 
 Do  you  think  that  our  immigration  laws  need  to  be  changed? 
 Do  you  think  that  women  are  given  preferential  treatment  in  job  promotions? 
 Do  you  think  that  the  women's  movement  has  gotten  out  of  hand? 
 Do  you  feel  that  you  are  working  below  your  potential? 
 Do  you  have  any  outstanding  charges? 
 Have  you  ever  been  in  a  ﬁght  with  a  police  officer,  correctional  staff,  teacher,  employer,  or  other 
 person  in  authority? 
 Have  you  ever  threatened  someone? 
 Have  you  ever  followed  someone? 
 Have  you  phoned  and  bothered  someone? 
 Have  you  ever  persisted  in  contacting  someone  against  his  or  her  will? 
 Have  you  ever  used  a  weapon  to  commit  a  crime  or  threaten  someone? 
 Have  you  ever  intentionally  set  a  ﬁre  to  destroy  property  or  harm  someone? 
 Have  you  ever  been  convicted  of  an  impaired  driving  offense?  [Have  you  had  your  driver's  license 
 taken  away  for  drinking  and  driving?  Have  your  friends/partner  argued  with  you  about  drinking  and 
 then  driving?] 
 Have  you  ever  shoplifted? 
 Have  you  ever  been  convicted  of  embezzlement?  [Have  you  committed  a  large  bank  fraud?Have  you 
 skimmed  money  off  the  top  from  a  company  that  you  worked  for?] 
 Do  you  belong  to  a  gang?  Do  you  and  your  friends  wear  colors?  Do  you  and  your  friends  belong  to  a 
 clubhouse?] 
 Have  you  ever  been  arrested/convicted  for  a  hate  crime?  [Have  you  ever  defaced  a  religious  or 
 burial  property?  Have  you  sprayed  hate  graffiti?] 
 Do  you  have  a  place  to  live?  [Have  you  changed  addresses  more  than  three  times  in  the  past  year 
 (do  not  count  incarcerations)?  In  the  last  year,  have  you  lived  in  a  shelter?] 
 How  do  you  like  the  place  where  you  live?  [Do  you  plan  to  move?  Do  you  enjoy  showing  your  place  to 
 friends?  What  kind  of  a  neighborhood  do  you  live  in?  Do  the  police  visit  your  neighborhood  often? 
 Are  there  people  in  the  area  who  are  dealing  drugs,  doing  B  &  Es,  or  fencing  stolen  property?] 
 Are  you  a  citizen  of  this  country?  [What  is  your  immigration  status?  Are  you  in  the  country  illegally? 
 Are  you  under  review  for  possible  deportation?  Are  you  under  investigation  by  the  Immigration 
 Review  Board?] 
 Do  you  have  trouble  disciplining  your  child?  [Does  your  child  refuse  to  listen  to  you?  Does  your  child 
 leave  home  without  telling  you  where  he  or  she  is  going?  Has  your  child  ever  been  taken  away  from 
 you  by  a  child  protection  agency?  Do  you  argue  with  your  child  over  the  friends  he  or  she  has?  Do 
 you  feel  emotionally  distant  from  your  child?] 
 Do  you  have  some  health  problems  that  are  a  concern  to  you?  [Are  you  HIV  positive?  Do  you  have 
 AIDS?  Hepatitis?  Has  a  doctor  diagnosed  a  problem  that  may  prevent  you  from  working?  Are  you  on 
 any  medications  and  for  what?] 
 Have  you  ever  been  diagnosed  as  having  a  learning  or  reading  disability?  [Have  you  been  tested  by  a 
 school  psychologist  for  difficulties  in  learning?  Have  you  ever  been  assessed  by  a  psychologist  or  an 
 educational  specialist  for  problems  in  learning  or  an  attention  deﬁcit  or  hyperactivity?  In  school  did 
 you  receive  remedial  education?] 
 Do  you  feel  depressed?  [Do  you  ﬁnd  that  you  are  not  enjoying  life?  Have  you  lost  your  appetite?  Do 
 you  ﬁnd  yourself  crying  over  little  things?  Are  you  having  trouble  sleeping?  Are  your  friends  worried 
 about  your  happiness?  Do  you  feel  that  things  are  hopeless?  Have  you  lost  interest  in  activities  that 
 you  used  to  enjoy?] 
 Do  you  think  about  committing  suicide?  [Have  you  made  plans  to  take  your  own  life?  Have  you  ever 
 attempted  suicide?  Have  you  told  someone  that  you  feel  like  dying?] 
 Are  you  unhappy  with  yourself?  [Do  you  feel  that  everybody  is  better  than  you?  Are  you  down  on 
 yourself?  Do  you  worry  a  lot?  Do  you  ﬁnd  it  difficult  to  accept  criticism  from  others?  Do  you  feel 
 unsure  of  yourself?] 
 Do  you  have  any  concerns  about  your  emotional  stability? 
 Have  you  been  considering  going  to  see  a  psychologist  or  psychiatrist? 
 Have  considered  checking  yourself  into  a  psychiatric  facility? 
 Do  you  think  committal  to  a  psychiatric  hospital  may  be  necessary? 
 Are  you  bothered  by  uncontrollable  urges  or  ideas? 
 Do  you  sometimes  feel  that  things  are  "unreal?" 
 Do  you  ever  hear  voices  or  see  things  that  are  not  really  there? 
 Are  you  taking  any  medications  for  a  psychological  or  emotional  problem? 
 If  Yes,  list  medication(s). 
 Is  there  a  documented  diagnosis  of  a  mental  disorder  by  a  qualiﬁed  health  practitioner? 
 Have  you  ever  been  abused  by  a  family  member? 
 What  happened?  Who  abused  you?  When  did  the  abuse  occur? 
 Are  you  presently  being  abused? 
 Have  you  seen  your  parents  ﬁghting  when  you  were  young? 
 Have  you  felt  neglected  by  your  parents  or  family? 
 Does  a  family  member  harshly  criticize  you  and  make  you  feel  worthless? 
 Does  your  boss  always  criticize  you  and  your  work? 
 Do  you  have  any  health  problems  that  we  have  not  yet  discussed? 
 Do  you  have  any  mental  health  (or  psychiatric)  problems  that  we  have  not  yet  discussed? 
 Do  you  have  any  personal  needs  that  we  have  not  yet  discussed? 
 What  is  your  ﬁrst  language  (if  other  than  dominantor  national  language)? 
 Do  you  follow  any  speciﬁc  cultural  or  religious  traditions  involving  diet,  appearance,  clothing,  or 
 special  or  sacred  activities?  [Would  you  like  to  involve  someone  from  your  cultural  community  in 
 your  case  plan  (IfAboriginal/Native  American)  Would  you  like  to  see  a  Native  elder?]. 
 Do  you  belong  to  an  ethnic/racial  group?  [Do  you  feel  at  a  disadvantage  coming  from  a  minority? 
 Would  you  like  to  involve  someone  from  your  ethnic/racial  group  in  your  case  plan?] 
 Is  there  anything  else  that  will  hinder  or  hold  back  your  progress  in  programs  or  treatment?  [ls 
 there  anything  else  that  might  be  done  to  help  you  obtain  the  most  beneﬁt  possible  from  your 
 program  or  treatment?  Are  there  any  kinds  of  staff  or  workers  who  you  ﬁnd  difficult  or  easy  to  work 
 with?  Are  there  any  kinds  of  treatment  or  counseling  programs  that  you  feel  have  worked 
 particularly  well  or  poorly  for  you?] 
